# Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Setup

Prerequisites:

- A basic understanding of the Linux command line
- A basic understanding of web servers and web applications
- A basic understanding of cloud computing concepts
- A basic understanding of Cryptography and Network Security

# Introduction

This repository contains a step-by-step setup your own of a Virtual Private Server (VPS) instance that will be running Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS for hosting web applications. It covers the following topics:

#### [Setting up and securing a virtual private server](./2.securing-the-vps-instance.md)

#### [ Installing and configuring a web server (Nginx) and ssl certificate](./3.web-server.md)

#### [Installing node and setting up version control](./4.setup-application.md)

#### [Create a sample web application](./5.Create-a-sample-web-application.md)

#### [Setting up a reverse proxy server](./6.Setting-up-a-reverse-proxy-server.md)

#### [Setting up a CI/CD pipeline with GitHub Actions: Webhooks and WebSockets](./7.ci-cd.md)

- Continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD with GitHub Actions)
- Installing and configuring a database server (PostgreSQL)
- Monitoring and logging
- Load balancing and caching
- Containerization and Kubernetes
- Resources and references
- Glossary of terms

Disclaimer: This guide is intended for informational purposes only and may ideal if you are setting up a VPS instance for personal use or for a small-scale web application. If you are setting up a VPS instance for a production environment or for a large-scale web application, you may need to consult with a professional sysadmin or DevOps engineer to ensure that your infrastructure is secure, scalable, and reliable.

## Setting up a Virtual Private Server (VPS) Instance (Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS)

### step 1: Buy a VPS instance

Visit any cloud provider of your choice and create a virtual private server (VPS) instance. You can use any cloud provider of your choice. Some popular cloud providers include AWS, Google Cloud, Azure, DigitalOcean, etc.

We won't be using the SDKs of the cloud providers to set up the VPS or any automation ( at least not too much of it), Instead will just buy a VPS instance from the cloud provider and use our local machine terminal to SSH into the server, then set up our infrastructure manually. That means most the steps can be done on any VPS instance regardless of the cloud provider. The manual setup can be time-consuming and error-prone, but it gives you more control over your infrastructure and helps you understand how things work under the hood.

However, using the SDKs or command-line and other automation tools provided by these cloud providers can make the process of managing and automating your infrastructure much easier. Moreover, secure wise always use the industry-standard security tools to secure your infrastructure.

Note: You can also use your own hardware if you have a spare machine lying around or can use a virtualization software like VirtualBox, VMware, or Proxmox to create a virtual machine on your own hardware, or containerization software like Docker.

During the creation of the VPS instance, you can open the following ports:

- 22 (SSH) for remote access
- 80 (HTTP) for web traffic ( you can disable this later or redirect it to port 443)
- 443 (HTTPS) for secure web traffic

Lastly, you can choose the operating system you want to use and region closest to you, leave the rest of the settings as default. In this setup, we will be using Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS.

### step 2: Generate SSH keys and connect to the VPS instance

```bash
#open your terminal: preferable git bash or windows subsystem for linux if on windows
cd ~/.ssh  # if does not exist (mkdir .ssh)
ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -C "yourMail@example.com"  # Generate a new SSH key
```

You guard the private key but copy the public key across to the remote host (VM) to which you want to do key-based authentication. You can do this by running the following command:

```bash
  cat ~/.ssh/yourPublicKey.pub
```

Before you setup the ssh config, check if you can connect to the remote machine using the following command:

```bash
ssh -i ~/.ssh/yourPrivateKey azureuser@yourRemoteMachineExternalIpAdress
```

exit the remote machine by running the following command:

```bash
exit
```

Back on your local machine add the private key to the ssh-agent to avoid entering the passphrase every time you connect to the remote

```bash
eval "$(ssh-agent -s)" # start the ssh-agent in the background
ssh-add ~/.ssh/yourPrivateKey # add the private key to the ssh-agent
```

create a configuration file for SSH (~/.ssh/config) to specify the key to use for each host. Here's an example:

```bash
nano ~/.ssh/config
```

```bash
Host azure # an alias for the remote machine (you can use any name you want)
  HostName YourdomainName # your domain name or external ip address(copy from the vps instance)
    User azureuser # default user: check your remote machine for the default user
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/yourPrivateKey
#add more hosts here as github as needed
```

secure and restrict access to it your ~/.ssh/config file by running the following command:

```bash
chmod 600 ~/.ssh/config
chmod 600 ~/.ssh/yourPrivateKey
chown $USER:$USER yourPrivateKey
# ssh -Tv git@github.com // run this if you a setting an ssh key for github to test your connection
```

Now you can connect to the remote machine using the alias you specified in the config file:

```bash
ssh azure # or whatever alias you specified in the config file
```

next page: [Setting up and securing a virtual private server](./2.securing-the-vps-instance.md)
visit [SSH Config](https://www.ssh.com/academy/ssh) for more information
visit [Linux Bible](https://www.amazon.com/Linux-Bible-Christopher-Negus/dp/111821854X) for more information
